Why I left LTC

Disclaimer #1: LTC means Linux Technology Center, a group dedicated to implement open source solutions at IBM. It is a global team and has units in China, India, German, Brazil and US. This text refers to Brazil team, where I have been working for almost 3 years.

Disclaimer #2: I put LTC on title because IBM has a lot of departments and groups, and each one has its own culture, reality, problems and good things. It's absolutely unfair with IBM talk about a local situation. I imagine that the points I list here probably fit in other places inside and outside IBM.

---

The decision about change job is complicated and has many variables. There are direct points like money, career and benefits - and others that depends on how is the profile of each one: satisfaction, happiness, flexibility. Besides all this it still has familiar relationships, objectives and plans. All these things have been hammered my mind recently and, because that, I decided to leave LTC Brazil.

In LTC Brazil exists good things. The main one is about the flexibility to stay at home some days of the week (working remotely). I live in a big city in Brazil, and the traffic is crazy and stressful. Depending on the moment of your life, this flexibility can also give to you more time with a newborn son or even your kids little bit older. However, the IBM kwows very well how this situation is convenient to use it as balance weight when you desire a promotion or even a salary increase. Other good reason to work at LTC is the network you can build due great people working there, passionated about they are doing and the open source world. Work with Linux it's a great experience and, at the same time, a big challenge that is easier to handle with guys like the ones at LTC Brazil. Some of them are very relevant in open source communities and have great knowledge about technical stuffs - you certainly can learn a lot. If you are starting your career it's a great place to walk your first steps.

Last but not least work at IBM can aggregate you a huge experience about how a big company works and faces hard economical situations. In bad times the capacity of make money is an art, and a big player like IBM has a huge know-how about it. It's a good place to leave aside some passions that you have been keeping since University and start to see the real world as is: a place where the companies are not existing to make charity.

But (forgive me the pun) there is no free coffee. If you work at LTC Brazil, you also handle some bad things.

I have almost six years as graduated in one of the most important Universities in Brazil. I also worked before IBM in a great R&D Center and had contact with incredible professionals and academic teachers. And even with this background I was seen by LTC leadership as a "entry level" professional. The direct consequence of this classification is that my salary was lower than I considered fair enough. To be honest, I have no big reasons to protest about this because, after to talk with some peers, I realized that my salary was above average. But this fact didn't make happy - exactly the opposite: if I was receiving above average, so the average was the problem. Many good professionals at LTC Brazil were (and still are) receiving less money than they deserv, and this showed me how much the company (or, at least, my leadership) cares about its professionals.

One of the most important things in any area is a way to evaluate your effort. Through this way you can request a salary increase - or even be reprimanded due results below the expectations. There are so many ways to do this (and I don't have enough information to say that one method is better than another one), but all of them have a common point: the process must be led by someone that understands the business and all the technical stuffs related to it. In my case, I was managed by a guy with a graduation in other area than computer science or related, and this kind of situation drives me to madness. All my efforts and best technical solutions were underestimated because my leader just didn't know how difficult that challenge was. In last 2 years I had to explain my achievements in the same way as explained to my mother - and she doesn't have a computer science degree. Although my manager could have good intentions(?), I never got from his part an effort to better understand my techinical decisions, and the result of this scenario is that you could say anything with a minimum level of coherence that everything was ok. Some people can feel very confortable with this scenario, but when you are trying to do a career and consolidate yourself as a good professional, this situation sucks.

As a direct consequence of the last paragraph, it was impossible to argue about how badass I was when I rewrote a text interface to install packages on system, or when I implemented a solution to increase the user experience of our product. And, as you can deduce, I never had a salary increase due my achievements, and I never knew someone that had (ok, some people had salary increases, but after some exchanged information and with some peers and connecting the dots I realized that these people didn't win more money due their achievements only, but it was also a adjust to better acommodate them on salary average of the department).

Another consistent and reasonable fact to explain why I left LTC Brazil is how the products are faced front the dates to delivery them. In other words, it's much more important to deliver an incomplete product on scheduled date than deliver a good product 2 or 3 days delayed. Contracts with customers are used to be very complicated and stuffed of clauses on penalties for missed deadlines. I can perfectly understand this, but what I have been asking myself during these years was: if the deadlines are so important, why the company don't expend more time making better schedules and plannings? Why meetings about plans are so unproductives? As a developer, I was frustrated knowing that I was paid to deliver something far from the best I could produce just because a top dog assumed stupid deadlines to not antagonize the customer and the market. This kind of situation allows me understand who controls the game: the market, not IBM. It's pretty different of 80s when IBM used to set the bar to the rest of the world. Nowadays IBM has become just one more piece in a Monopoly market game, lead by stackholders numbers and investors' expectations. When you can realize this in your mind you conclud that "Innovation that Matters" has been replaced by "Stockoptions that Matters", or any other market term.

(By the way, innovation at IBM must be handled in a separated text).

This current culture at IBM (and at LTC as well) can explain another reason to leave it: how IBM cares about its talents. I saw great talents going out without any effort of LTC to retain them. Surely there are many reasons to someone leaves the job, but the minimum that the company might do is try to difficult this, either through a good increase salary purposal, either through a plan to retain it giving more perspectives. My last project have experienced this situation having to implement some solutions that require specific knowlegde that is completely dominated by a guy that leaved IBM six mounths ago. This lack of vision about the future not so distant made the difference in my motivation - after all, who knows about what projects will be closed next year due market moves?

I could write tons of other reasons but I prefer debate them only with my close friends. I'm absolutely sure about two or three really really bad things that happened with me, but I will never prove them so let they go. When you are under a structure in which the information is absolutely controlled by 4 or 5 people, it's easy to be classified as a worker full of happiness and with no problems to the owners of the money. So whatever I write here, some people just won't believe.

At the end, three advices:

- LTC Brazil is a great place to start your career, but don't let yourself acommodate about your capacity and your value. Always have a B-plan;
- Always keep in mind that your project can finish without any reasons (for you), and even the reasons exist, the leadership will not tell you;
- IBM in gerenal is not a democracy, so take care about your words. Some people can handle the truth.
